<pre>
  BIP: ??
  Title: Payment Request instant confirmations
  Author: Lawrence Nahum <lawrence@greenaddress.it>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2014-06-04
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP describes an enhancement to the payment protocol
([[bip-0070.mediawiki|BIP 70]]) that allows trusted third parties to provide
instant transaction confirmation functionality to other third parties that are
willing to trust the instantness provided by the instant confirmation provider.

It is meant to solve the problem of Bitcoin transactions requiring block
confirmations to prevent senders from doing a double spend, which is an
obstacle for doing transactions requiring quick confirmation, such as coffee
purchases.

This proposal is not tied to any specific implementation of instant
confirmations. Any third party such as a wallet provider can allow its users
to send instant Bitcoin transactions, given that payment recipients are willing
to trust the guarantees provided.

Such third party instant confirmation guarantees can be supported by any
appropriate technical implementation, like storing sets of already spent
multisignature outputs.

The first implementation of this BIP is done by GreenAddress wallet and is
based on server-side-signed multisignature transactions with the server
verifying that outputs were not spent before.


==Motivation==

The payment protocol allows transactions to be negotiated between Bitcoin
services such as wallets and merchants. It is a hence convenient place to add
support for requesting instant transactions from transaction senders and
providing instant guarantees to transaction receivers.


==Specification==

The following fields are added to the payment protocol messages as an optional
extension, as per [[bip-payment-request-instant-confirmations/instantconfirmation.proto|instantconfirmation.proto]]:

In the PaymentDetails message:
 * trusted_instant_providers.

In the Payment message:
 * instant_pki_type,
 * instant_pki_data,
 * instant_signature.

A new Transactions message is also added with a "transactions" field.

===trusted_instant_providers field===
This optional field should contain a list of certificate CNs which are trusted
by the payment request, if any.

===instant_pki_type field===
public-key infrastructure (PKI) system being used to identify the instant
confirmation provider. All implementation should support "x509+sha256" and
"x509+sha1".

===instant_pki_data field===
PKI-system data that identifies the instant confirmation provider and is used
to create a digital signature. In the case of X.509 certificates,
instant_pki_data ontains one or more X.509 certificates (see Certificates
section of ([[bip-0070.mediawiki|BIP 70]]) for details).

===instant_signature===
instant_signature should be calculated from hash of the serialized Transactions
message with transactions field copied over from the Payment message.


==Rationale==
The X.509 standard was chosen for consistency with BIP 70 and because of its
feature completeness, which includes certificate chains and key revocation.

Alternative specification was considered with plain ECDSA signatures and
lists of public keys stored by services willing to accept instant confirmations,
but it was deemed insufficient (https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/65#issuecomment-43761124).


==Compatibility==

Because protobuf extensions are optional, any BIP 70 implementation can safely
ignore the fields specified here and do transactions without instant
confirmations.


==Example==
# Merchant sends a PaymentRequest message with <code>trusted_instant_providers</code> in PaymentDetails set to a two element list ["greenaddress.it", "coinbase.com"].
# The wallet application (greenaddress or coinbase) notices that <code>trusted_instant_providers</code> is set to a list containing its CN, so it serializes a <code>Transactions</code> message with  transactions copied over from the <code>Payment</code> message. The serialized <code>Transactions</code> message is signed using the wallet's private key.
# A Payment message is sent containing:
#* <code>instant_pki_type</code> and <code>instant_pki_data</code> with a certificate having its CN equal to greenaddress.it or coinbase.com, and
#* <code>instant_signature</code> with a signature from private key matching the certificate.
# Merchant verifies the above signature and basing on it trusts that the instant confirmation provider will not allow double spending the funds.